Immanuel Laskaris was a man for an earlier age. He would have, perhaps, made a great Roman Emperor, but he was a poor match for the limited resources of the Asian State, a region whose heartland was pastoral at worst and feudal at best, a region whose few remaining great cities hugged the coastline and clung to the memory of ancient times. However, Immanuel was a poet and aspiring philosopher, few Emperors did so much to foster the growth of Asian cultural life, or wasted so much blood and treasure in their attempts to live up to the hoary legacy of Rome. His warring began at a young age, with an intricately planed three-pronged assault on the Xasar city of Konstantikert. Fed by the fields of the Dnieper, the city had grown into a true metropolis under the Xasar, and its walls and exterior fortifications were well-maintained. A seat of Buddhist scholarship, playing host to universities and temples and an opulent Xasar royal palace, the city was in the eyes of the Asian cities, an insult to everything that old Constantinople had once been. Accordingly, Immanuel had near total support from the powerful urban magistrates and the rural landlords alike.

His defeat was thus all the more humiliating. While the Xasar fleet was swept aside and ruined, the Asian army starved and suffered outside Constantinople, and as Xasar reinforcements poured in and encircled the besieging army, Immanuel was forced to lead a disastrous retreat back across the strait. If not for their distaste for ruling a large Christian population, the Xasar might have invaded and wreaked devastation upon Asia Minor. As it was, they contented themselves with an indemnity and hostages from the great cities of Asia.

Smarting from this blow, Immanuel turned East, towards the weakening Khardi Empire, embroiled in border wars and distracted with substantial economic problems. He raised many mercenaries and Votive soldiers with the promise of plunder for payment, and for some time it seemed that he could not be defeated. He swept as far south as Jerusalem, holding a victorious parade in the captured city and praising God for his victories. His troops hailed him as a savior and a conqueror, and, emboldened, he embarked on a campaign to rescue “our Assyrian brothers, who languish under the Boddo’s yoke.”

Mesopotamia was a bridge too far. The Khardi armies were ruined and unable to prevent his march down the Tigris, or the overthrow of the current Shah (and the subsequent “Susa Anarchy” which would last much of the following decade) but, bolstered by Arab and Bajinak mercenaries they were able to prevent the loss of Susa and wear down the limited resources of Immanuel’s army. While Immanuel was off playing the conqueror, his homelands were vulnerable, and the Ifthal wreaked havoc across Asia Minor in his absence, while the army slowly disintegrated. Soldiers, enriched by plunder, had almost no loyalty to Immanuel and within two years, he was no closer to taking Susa and his forces were all but gone. Encamped and eventually surrounded in the ruins of Tesifon, he was captured and ransomed back to Asia.

The Khardi would recover, but their prestige was shaken. A series of child Shahs only ensured that satraps would gain more and more power. The more successful local rulers were quick to begin calling themselves Shahs, and tax revenues continued to decline.


The Khardi had swept the Near East like a storm in their heyday. Unlikely conquerors, the sons of nomads, they had forged an enduring state in the wake of Ifthal and Turkish anarchy by taking advantage of the agricultural and commercial wealth of the Tigris and Euphrates. But the very land which won them their fortune was a fickle mistress. The Khardi were compelled by fortune to travel far from their hard-won homeland, and as settler colonies became ubiquitous, those who remained landholders imported increasing numbers of slaves, weakening the once great base of Khardi manpower. From Susa, a city transformed by a singular ambition to ape the past, the Iranshahs looked out at their territory and realized how shaky great empires could be. Their kingdom was built on the backs of so many cities, so many nations, so many proud peoples once broken.

In a sense, they must have known it was all doomed to ruin.

The first stirrings of trouble came in the wake of Emperor Immanuel Laskaris’ disastrous campaigns. Afterwards, the border lords consolidated their power independent of the central state, and no group did more to unsettle Khardi power in the west than the sect or association of warriors who called themselves the Bakhtiyar, or the fortunate ones.

Throughout history, many great minds have conceived of time as cyclical. What is the passing of the seasons but a microcosm of grander patterns? As one ephemeral generation is born, and lives, and dies to be replaced by another, we see time in its ceaseless flow, but also rebirth. Nowhere is this pattern more obvious than among the nations of Iran, cursed to see Empires rise and fall around them. From the Arsakid Palhava to the Sasanians to the Ifthal to the Khardi to the Bakhtiyar, the pattern remains constant.

The contender to the title of Shah rose, as all great dynasties do, from humble beginnings. They were derisively called Tayzig (from the Iranian tazik) by the old and pure Eftal families, a word which derided them as Arabs and foreigners, despite their adoption of Persian culture. There was truth to the slur, however, that the Bakhityar were mixed Arab-Ifthal in origin. Their own name for themselves roughly meant “fortunate” and in no small sense, they were incredibly fortunate. Far from the decadent and vicious court of Susa, they were able to carve out a real state for themselves with minimal interference.

However, the Bakhtiyar had their origins not as nobility but as bandits, a group of allied clans ruling Tadmur under the dominion of an enigmatic warlord named Akhsau, who was called Mansar, from the Arabic Mansur, or Victorious. There were many legends about Mansar. Some said that he was born blind, that he did not gain the ability to see until he was a man. Others said that at the age of thirteen he wandered in the desert and spoke to God, either the Christian deity or Ohrmazd, depending on whom you spoke to. Still others said that he was a demon in human flesh, and that his words seized things in the hearts of men that should not be seized.

Most, however, simply acknowledged that he was a brilliant and capable tactician, the sort of figure who would usurp the King of Tadmur at the age of 21 and expand his dominion from there, conquering fortress after fortress and through force, charisma and guile bringing the house of Mihiragula in line and carving out a crude but effective state which paid only lip-service to the royal court in Susa.

Akhsau was a rare sort of figure, and the Bakhityar were a completely unanticipated event historically. Within a few decades, all history would be changed by their rise.

Arabia was undergoing a crisis of faith. Saihism, the Arabic world’s response to the great missionary religions, was on the decline. Nestorianism and Buddhism warred for the hearts and minds of the Arab world, and the Church of the East, exiled from many of its traditional seats, had found a fertile audience among the scattered desert tribes of Arabia. Buddhism was popular in the south, among the wealthy merchant cities whose culture and civilization were an example for the northern tribes.

Akhsau took all comers, and encouraged the mystical reputation he had gathered. As he moved from victory to victory, the Arabs of the interior flocked to his banner, transforming desert raiders and bandits into a disciplined fighting force of bow-armed light cavalry. If the Ifthal had forgotten their nomadic roots, this new whirlwind from the desert had not at all – they specialized in ambush and raiding warfare, and they excelled at starving the Ifthal fortresses into submission.

While the Bakhtiyar moved from strength to strength, they were able to do so because of anarchy in the East. By the time Akhsau was forty, the Khardi had lost much of the Iranian plateau to marauding Turko-Afghan warlords in what was a sort of repeat of the Eftal collapse. Asia never truly recovered from the disastrous rule of Immanuel Laskaris, a sort of twenty year false “Golden Age” that would lead to their doom. Swift Tayzig and Ifthal cavalrymen turned the peninsula of Asia Minor upside down, and by 1150 the whole region was under Tayzig control. By 1160, Akhsau, now an old man, would not even acknowledge the Shah in Susa. By 1183, there was no longer a Shah in Susa, and the Khardi were divided into warring petty states.

As we will see, the Bakhtiyar themselves struggled to create an enduring state or legacy. Perhaps because of their origins, they quickly allowed internal divisions to overcome them in the aftermath of Akhsau’s conquests. Their architectural and cultural legacy was more enduring, as was their grand project to rebuild the Canal of the Pharaohs, which became known as the Mansar Canal. For a brief time, a unified Bakhtiyar Empire seemed poised to overcome the Khardi and reunite the Near East, but ultimately no-one would do more to unseat the Khardi than themselves. As the Khardi lost their distinct provincial culture and ties of tribe and clan to the appeal of universal Empire, as they accepted the broader Indo-Iranian culture practiced by the Ifthal, they became indistinct from their many subjects and even began to identify as them. Latter-day laws to prevent intermarriage between Khardi and Turks were never strictly followed, and coupled with the economic decline of Mesopotamia (rapid salinization and the rise of unproductive slave estates) their fate was sealed long before the Bajinak conquered Mosil.

[Don’t worry, I’m gonna talk about the Near East more soon. I know that things moved fast in this overview, and that my focus was nowhere near complete. But I wanted to start somewhere and start laying the groundwork for the larger themes of the 12th century, which even beyond the New World promises to be one full of shocking twists. Egypt, Iran, and many other places deserve a more in-depth focus than I gave them in this segment.

However, for the next update I think we're going to look at China and the changing East Asian economic scene, and perhaps also at Central Asia in the world of the Kitai and the Afsar. As ever, I welcome questions and comments. There's a lot of hints and references to events that need larger explanation in this segment, and I appreciate the chance to explain that stuff for those who are interested.]
