Great Cathay

The twelfth century in Kitai China was one of political consolidation and economic expansion. On the military front, the half-Mongol half-Kitai general Chimtay advanced from victory to victory. The Wu state crumbled under the brunt of his invasion.

The Kitai Emperor might have retired into the sublime luxuries of his palace at Kaifeng, but the Kitai nobility still raised their sons on the steppe and taught them to fight. Unlike the Uighurs before them, they did not integrate with their subject populations to the same degree. Instead they utilized the Han bureaucracy and their Uighur federates as intermediaries between the larger populace and their own relatively austere world. If the Kitai idolized the broader Chinese culture, they were not immediately consumed by it. If they saw their Emperors become decadent and wealthy behind the cloistered walls of the Kaifeng Golden Palace, they did not rebel against it. Indeed, no sooner did the Emperor start to fear that his people were growing restless than he ordered the massive 1123 invasion of Wu.

Chimtay was a capable tactician and won many proud cities over by the extent of his legendary mercy. During his campaign against the Wu, cities such asTongzhouand Yangzhou surrendered without a fight, bringing vast sums of wealth into the Imperial coffers and bringing the country closer and closer to reunification under a single Imperial banner When, several years later, Chimtay was ordered to invade the Chu, the siege of Fangcheng was notably ended within mere months as opposed to the anticipated years. In 1130, the general was in command of three whole southern divisions, and had the de facto backing of many of the ministries. His field army was unmatched for the quantity and quality of his cavalry, and from the silk road had acquired the latest in firepowder formulas.

Chimtay authored many early experiments into firepowder. Fangcheng was subject to an immense rain of bolts tipped with explosive “grenades” and the Chinese variant of the firespear, perfected by Imperial technicians, proved to be an unmatched shock weapon even in the hands of unskilled peasantry.

It is unclear whether or not he had imperial authority to invader the South Kingdom of Tai, but he did so, and when yet another sweeping victory came to him in 1132, Chimtay seemed unstoppable. His fame and reputation had eclipsed the hidden Emperor’s by far. A year later, summoned back to the capital, he came in force, with a huge army at his back.

He walked directly into a trap. The Kitai Emperor had enlisted the help of the Naiman Yabgu, and had hired two thousand personally loyal imperial guard soldiers. He gave them the standards and equipment of Chimtay’s own personal soldiers, and during a celebration of the general’s achievements, had these soldiers turn on Chimtay. In the confusion the general was quickly killed by the imposters, and the rank-and-file quickly fell into line. Those suspected of involvement in Chimtay’s plotting were either executed or quietly reassigned to distant frontiers. The architect of this plot, however, was not the Emperor but his confidant, the rising scholar-bureaucrat Zhao Wei.

Zhao Wei, the Prime Minister from 1153-1161 advocated revolutionary changes in the economic system of the country. In his opinion “The state and the ministries must take on their back the whole management of commerce, industry, and agriculture, so as to ensure the prosperity of all. It is the degradation of the common farmer that turns him to banditry, and it is the suffering of the merchant that leads him to sympathize with esoteric preachers.” Perfect social order, he argued, could be generated by enhanced state involvement. A devout member of Exoteric Buddhism, he believed strongly that a perfected regime could be attained only by strenuous application of all the power of the state bureaucracy.

The unification of the Yangtze River by a single power and the restoration of degraded and silted parts of the Grand Canal allowed economic renovation on an unprecedented scale. The coastal cities patronized by the Wu and Tai benefitted immensely from uninterrupted contact with the interior. The Kitai devoted immense resources to pacifying banditry and restoring order, and these acts seem to have paid off. Zhao Wei’s policies took inspiration perhaps from the Tamil trading houses he knew of from his youth as a hostage among the Tai. He established a central banking system as part of the Ministry of Revenue, and gave it a broad purview to invest in promising commercial enterprises.

The Emperor Yaol Jelu (Muzong) ruled in splendid opulence, remote as all his people were from the day-to-day affair of governing the south. Accordingly, it was a vastly expanded northern bureaucracy which took on that responsibility, in concert with local magistrates. The exam system, atrophied since its Qi era height, was brought back as a universal institution. If the gentry idolized the life of the noble farmer, they nevertheless found great fortunes to be made in investing in trade.

One of the largest advantages the new Kitai state had was that its Han gentry were intimately connected to a vast foreign population. Many of those who had fled the Uighurs had distant relations back in their mother country, and the Chinese overseas did not necessarily associate the Yaol dynasty with the brutality of the Uighurs. The Yaol were distant foreign despots whose meritocratic attitude did much to endear them to their subjects. And yet despite this era of harmony and contentment, the Uighur garrison cities remained, a fist within the velvet glove of Kitai hegemony.

All under heaven was reunited. But the top-down imperium of the Kitai had its flaws. In the rivers and valleys of China, new and bold thinkers were authoring their own novel philosophies that would eventually come into conflict with imperial orthodoxy…

North India

The Kshatriya warrior guilds and their mercenary counterparts had by the twelfth century blurred so as to become indistinct from one another. However, a defining facet of warfare on the subcontinent was that combat was almost exclusively conducted either by these groups or by massed levies of relatively poor quality. Professional troops represented a small clique within the broader civilization, and one that was difficult to gain access to.

When the Afghani warlord Khingal Askunu and his Turkish allies swept through Gandhara and broke upon the plains of Panchala, their fellow Sahputi often turned and betrayed their supposed paymasters. The republics of the north were overwhelmed one by one. Their treasure was brought back to Shamibal, the seat of the Askunu before Khingal’s son resettled in Lohawar.

The battles that defined the century were brutal affairs. The Askunu and their retainers fought as heavily armed and armored cavalry, and unlike the guild warriors they had no sense of fairness or honor. Where guild combat had become regulated by codes of conduct and diplomacy both practical and ritual, the Afghans did not care to preserve the lives of the defeated or maintain the social structures of the subcontinent.

However, perhaps because of the moderating influence of the Sahputi, the great temples and universities of the region were preserved. The sangha and equal-kingdoms were broken but in their submission they were allowed to organize as they saw fit. In victory, to Askunu were merciful. However, their destruction of the old North Indian martial elite fundamentally changed the region, and brought them into direct conflict with Gurjars and their Chandratreya patrons.

Afghanistan itself was a place in turmoil. It had never quite reconciled its glorious past with its new status as a frontier. The country of the Afghans was the home of great empires! Did not the Eftal come from Balkh, and the Johiyava come from their valley kingdoms? They sat at the crossroads of civilization, and they had no desire to be mere subjects of a distant monarch in Susa. No sooner did the Mitradharmids begin crumbling on itself than much of Afghanistan rose in open rebellion. The garrison cities were massacred. The tribes of the mountains, of whom the Askunu were but one of many, rose up openly and besieged Balkh, cutting off the Khardi Satrap from his lines of communication.

By the time the Khardi might have considered a counter-attack, the Afsar Turks were ranging freely across the Iranian plateau, and the Bajinak were besieging Mosil. There were higher priorities. Afghanistan was distant and inconsequential to the new Khardi policy, which was focused on maintaining its ever-weakening hold on the fertile crescent.

[Again, things will continue to be filled out as time goes on. I have a massive post on the fall of the Khardi in the works, but it's proving frustratingly difficult. Rest assured these posts will make more sense with that added context.

To those of you saying India was overdue for an invasion... yeah, you were right. And as soon as the Khardi began cracking, as soon as there wasn't a monolithic empire in the Near East... I think it was pretty much inevitable. However, its an open question whether or not the Afghans will reach the real centers of the Indian revolution. The warrior guilds of the Ganges have far greater numbers than the guilds of the north, and if nothing else economically that region has been less embroiled in the unproductive border wars that the Khardi and Gandharans faced off in time and again, or the relative power vacuum along the Indus.]
