In the broad compass of history, it can be easy to neglect the small scale. Certainly when telling the story of the all mankind, from the first city states along the banks of flooding rivers to mankind united in a global era of information and space exploration, it can be easy to forget the lesser moments that change the world.

And yet these moments happen constantly. If a different merchant had traveled to Ethiopia and not brushed against a rat, humanity might have avoided what would become the worst pandemic in human history, the first global plague which touched every continent. If a soldier had not brought down his cudgel on the head of a Sassanian Shah, the Eftal might never have risen to power. If a herder’s son hadn’t traveled to Constantinople and joined their army as a mercenary, the Roman Empire might never have fallen.

When dealing with an event as vast as the Ragnarssen exchange, when so many disparate peoples began massive oceanic migrations, it is especially easy to forget. One of the long term goals of this second iteration of Rise of the White Huns will be to capture as much of that as possible while still overlaying the broad trends and themes of each era. Suggestions as to how best to achieve this are always welcome.

Heretics and Votivists – the Troubles of Europe go West

The culture of Ispana was unique within the Frankish Empire. With its own royal court, it was a proper kingdom where the rest of the “nations” were duchies and marches with nothing but shared culture to unite them. Culturally, Ispana was nevertheless considered a backwater. Her poetry, the courtly elites of Aachen said, was pastoral and vulgar at best, and crude and blasphemous at worst. Her scholarship had nothing on the heady grandeur of Italy, where great minds discussed the nature of angels and matter along platonic lines. Her architecture was infused with barbarian models taken from the unique Mauri sensibility which permeated the southern Mediterranean and had little in common with the delicate arches and spires of the north.

Accordingly, the religious movements Ispana spawned were unique as well. One common heresy, called Autotheism, held that the perfect soul and the Godhead were indistinguishable from each other. Believed to be inspired by the movement of peoples and ideas from the East, Autotheism found fertile ground in Spain, Sicily, and other areas where local rulers had little incentive to directly combat heresy. In time it would come to influence the paganism of the Berber peoples as well. Another, the Josefite cult, was classically gnostic – its followers refrained from vaginal heterosexual intercourse so as to not bring new souls into the damned world. Accordingly, it died out within in a generation. Its legacy was preserved in church tracts which condemned the cult as a “a den of the most perverse sodomites, a cellar of inequity at the root of the Christian world.”

As Christian missionaries found their way to the New World, so too did a small but growing number of Autotheists. The lawlessness of Fanceau’s regime appealed to those who could at a moment’s notice find themselves persecuted. Unlike the Tinanian heresy, which had secular wealth and importance, Autotheists by contrast generally were all too well aware that they survived by the dint of their local lord’s whim, and accordingly were more encouraged than any other group to flee. The desire to found a “New Jerusalem to the Perfection of the Soul” as one later Autotheist writer put it, was strong. Accordingly of all the various groups who would risk their lives on the great transatlantic journey, few were more fanatical in their hopes than the Autotheists. If they were only a small number, on a virgin island whose inhabitants were slaughtered by disease, the Autotheists had a critical advantage – alone of the Frankish colonists they had brought a significant number of women, and their towns were able to sustain their numbers far more efficiently than the scattered Frankish trading posts and waystations.

The Duke of Haiti himself was an Ispanian, and while undoubtedly familiar with the sect, he declared that his “city” would not become another seat for the “false men and sodomites” who came ashore after the great journey. Where he gave shelter to heathens, adventurers, and brigands, and tolerated the varied forms of “vice” and “immortality” that accompanied any colonial settlement, heretics, it seemed, were a bridge too far in the mind of Duke Rodrigo Meles. Autotheists quickly established their own safe haven not so far away, on the Isle of Aravacia.

Back home, the lords of Ispana were happy. Whatever worries of land overcrowded by a surfeit of hungry tenants or heretics they might have held were assuaged by the promise of a vast new world which would conveniently serve as a dumping ground. Furthermore, they were beginning to see the profits of their overseas voyages. With each new expedition, men such as Fernanti Dias de Vivar brought back ships laden with treasure. Regular lines of trade and communication were slowly being established with the Fula and the scattered southern coastal tribes. In 1157, the Ukwu sent an embassy to the Frankish court, to much wonder and amazement. The Ukwu Embassy, whose name is recorded only as “John”, was more than happy to embrace Christ and be baptized. In all probability, the language barrier was far too great for such things to be clear, and the Ukwu concept of divinity was utterly alien to the European mind, but it was a propaganda coup nonetheless for the reigning Emperor, Aloysius the Blond.

Marcel de Amiens was another such man whose character and individual actions would set the course of history along a different path. He was a man of famed humility and piety, but also extraordinary charm and persuasiveness. Where his contemporaries, such as the decadent and notorious Niccolo Cosca, were unscrupulous aspiring warlords, Marcel de Amiens was a loyal servant of the Frankish crown. What he did in the New World, he did for God and Emperor alike. When he conquered, he read royal writs out loud to the people, blithely ignoring the fact that they did not understand the language, and accepting that his duties were done. He was the first Votivist of the New World.

Arriving in the New World, he learned while in Haiti of a famed kingdom far to the north, where great cities of gold rose out of mounds in the earth. Gathering a motley crew of adventurers and a few native translators, he would embark up the Great River that divided Northern Solvia. He would never return, but his influence would live on.

Liuqiu and the rise of Chola hegemony

The decline of Srivijaya left a power vacuum. It was the Chola dynasty that found themselves most positioned to exploit that vacuum. They already had connections in every great trading city across the Malay islands. They already had immense wealth and a navy more than capable of asserting its dominance across the ocean.

They only needed a cause to expand their power even further afield. Fortunately, fate would give one to them.

Besides the aboriginals, who claimed they had always lived on the island since the dawn of time, the first settlers of Liuqiu[1] were exiles and refugees from the Qi state. Merchants made sporadic contact with Liuqiu, and in the Liang dynasty era there had even been a plan proposed to colonize the island make it into a colony or a tributary, but that plan was quickly dismissed when it was realized by visiting emissaries that the island had no particular value. There was nothing to be found in Liuqiu that could not be found in the Rivers and Valleys of China.

It was only with the rise of the Kitai that the first permanent settlement of Chinese people was established on the island. A rough and disordered community of exiles, their communities quickly became a haven for pirates, particularly the notorious Zheng Li. From sheltered bases on Liuqiu, they were able to raid the sea lanes with impunity, and several attempts by the Wu Kingdom navy to defeat the pirate bases were ineffectual at best – the Wu would arrive, but by then the pirates would have taken shelter with the aboriginal peoples, and their only prize would be burning empty villages and towns.

Part of this had to do with the gradual atrophy of the Wu navy. As the Kitai grew stronger, the Wu pulled money from their fleet and put more money into ultimately hopeless attempts to defend their northern border. As more and more ships were abandoned and left to rot, the Wu lost their capacity to project power. Zheng Li and his pirates became ever bolder, building a fleet which could rival anything the Wu had in their arsenal.

In 1116, a group of Chola backed “sreni men” would arrive on Liuqiu, seeking a lost convoy which they believed to have been taken by the pirates. Their main purpose, as it always was, was to negotiate a ransom for the lost cargo of silks and perhaps any high-ranking sailors whose lives were particularly valuable. These sorts of negotiations had occurred before. They were usually conducted with relative peace. For whatever reason however, this time negotiations broke down.

It would not be until two years later that even one of their number would return. He had seemingly aged many years, and he had clearly been brutalized. He could barely speak, but one name was on his lips: Zheng Li.

This was a bridge too far for the Chola. Pirates were an acceptable cost of business – sometimes you found yourself attacked by them, but usually they could be bribed or threatened and overall they only took a small cut of the profits. This was different. Pirates who did not negotiate were pirates that couldn’t be accounted for. Aligning themselves with several Champa and Malay cities who had a grievance against Zheng Li and his marauders, the Chola built a massive naval coalition to not only raid the coasts, as so many had done before, but indeed to conquer the island outright and establish a friendly state there.

In 1119, a not insubstantial Chola fleet arrived in Liuqiu after a several month long tour of the region. The campaign was swift – after the pirates retreated into the highland, they were shocked to find an army, including several war elephants, disembark after them and give chase. They were even more shocked when the Chola did not immediately attack but rather met with the head of a lesser coastal tribe, the Siraya.

The Chola Admiral, speaking through an interpreter, made a simple declaration, the exact text of which is apocryphal. The Siraya were granted the island to rule as a proxy of the Chola Maharaja and were to work to prevent piracy. In exchange they would receive arms, goods, and support from the Chola. However, none of it was as easy as it sounded. It would be a long, bloody, three year campaign to subdue the highland tribes and bring “order” to the island. Even then, disease and poor supply had sapped the effectiveness of the Chola army. Their allies had largely pulled out of the fighting and morale was low. The war only ended with the Siraya signing the Datu Compact, an agreement which limited their territory to the western lowlands and allowed the other tribes to maintain their independence and pay a token tribute to the Siraya.

In 1126, a joint Chola-Champa venture organized by the Golden Bull Nakara Sreni had established a city called Soulang (Sian) on the western coast of the island. They brought in red brick from Java and raised a fortress and temple to Visnu Narayana some ten miles from the Siraya capital of Chali (Kalipura). Instead of a pirate haven, the Siraya kingdom was a friendly waystation for ships on their way north, and kingdom’s small landholding class provided a captive market for Chola goods.

[1] Taiwan, a name which unless I’m wrong about the etymology I couldn’t really justify using.
